<h1>Commonwealth Legislative Drafting Manual</h1>
<p>Roger Rose</p>

<p>Commonwealth Secretariat<br>
Marlborough House<br>
Pall Mall<br>
London SW1Y 5HX<br>
United Kingdom</p>

<p>© Commonwealth Secretariat 2017</p>

<p>All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or otherwise without the permission of the publisher.</p>

<p>Published by the Commonwealth Secretariat<br>
Edited by Prepress Projects Ltd<br>
Typeset by Nova Techset<br>
Cover design by the Commonwealth Secretariat<br>
Printed by the Commonwealth Secretariat</p>

<p>Views and opinions expressed in this publication are the responsibility of the author[s] and should in no way be attributed to the institutions to which [he/she/they is/are] affiliated or to the Commonwealth Secretariat.</p>

<p>Wherever possible, the Commonwealth Secretariat uses paper sourced from responsible forests or from sources that minimise a destructive impact on the environment.</p>

<p>Copies of this publication may be obtained from<br>
Publications Section<br>
Commonwealth Secretariat<br>
Marlborough House<br>
Pall Mall<br>
London SW1Y 5HX<br>
United Kingdom<br>
Tel: +44 (0)20 7747 6500<br>
Email: publications@commonwealth.int<br>
Web: www.thecommonwealth.org/publications</p>

<p>A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.</p>

<p>ISBN (paperback): 978-1-84929-169-9<br>
ISBN (e-book): 978-1-84859-963-5</p>

<h1>Foreword</h1>

<p>The global Sustainable Development Goals agreed in 2015 boldly proclaim that the development aspirations of all people everywhere are intimately linked with promotion of the rule of law.</p>

<p>The laws of a country touch on almost all aspects of economic, social and environmental development; they regulate economic transactions and contracts, provide for legal identity, gender equality and access to justice, as well as protect natural resources, such as water, minerals and forests.</p>

<p>The rule of law, as a principle of governance, requires that all laws must promote equality, accountability, and fairness. In this regard, the <em>process</em> by which laws are made is determinative of their ultimate quality. National legislation must be made through transparent procedures, and be drafted so as to ensure legal certainty.</p>

<p>Good laws therefore depend on the abilities and capabilities of legislative drafters, who are called upon to translate policy into simple, concise and lucid Bills. Bills which have clarity as their essence make the work of Parliament easier and more effective.</p>

<p>Legislation passed by Parliament that is clear, comprehensive, concise, and consistent, in turn, aids the work of the judiciary and public servants. It enables private enterprises and individuals to know and understand the law. It ultimately contributes to realisation of the rule of law and the promotion of sustainable development.</p>

<p>For many small Commonwealth jurisdictions, legislative drafting presents a significant challenge. A small jurisdiction, with perhaps just one or two parliamentary counsel, has to produce laws across the whole range of subject matter that any larger jurisdiction would also deal with. International legal obligations and regional harmonisation initiatives, as well as the pace of developments in technology, financial services, and the sciences, have further increased the need for new and amended legislation in recent years.</p>

<p>The Commonwealth Secretariat has, for many years, been at the forefront of providing assistance to countries in the drafting of good laws. The placement of expert advisers through the support of the Commonwealth Fund for Technical Cooperation has assisted numerous small and developing Commonwealth countries in strengthening their legislative drafting capacity.</p>

<p>I warmly welcome this <em>Commonwealth Legislative Drafting Manual</em> as a landmark tool for promoting the rule of law and development. Drawing on our shared heritage of the common law, the Manual brings together an abundance of Commonwealth experience in legislative drafting.</p>

<p>Alongside national drafting standards and guidelines, the Manual can act as a key knowledge tool for every Commonwealth legislative drafter. I commend its use to legislative drafting offices across the Commonwealth and salute the dedication of all involved in the preparation and promulgation of our laws. Together, I am confident that we will realise the full potential of legislation and the rule of law to contribute to our common growth and development.</p>

<p><strong>The Rt Hon Patricia Scotland QC</strong><br>
<strong>Secretary-General of the Commonwealth</strong></p>

<h1>Preface</h1>

<p>In 1975, at the instance of the Hon. Mr Justice Kutlu Fuad, the then Director of the Legal Division of the Commonwealth Secretariat, the four Directors of the Commonwealth Secretariat Legislative Drafting Scheme at the time contributed to a Legislative Drafting Manual as part of the measures undertaken at the request of Commonwealth member countries to help overcome the shortage of experienced legislative counsel. The original Manual was published in 1976 and further revised in 1978.</p>

<p>At their meeting in Edinburgh in 2008, Commonwealth Law Ministers examined the continuing challenges faced by small Commonwealth countries and acknowledged that it was not enough to focus solely on training legislative drafters. They recognised that different strategies in areas such as institutional strengthening, recruitment and retention of drafters, and capacity building were required. To that end, they welcomed the development of legislative drafting and style manuals and guidelines on the legislative process.</p>

<p>In 2013, the Hon. Justice V.C.R.A.C. Crabbe was assigned the task of producing a manual on legislative drafting, by revising the text of the original Manual. At their meeting in 2014, Commonwealth Law Ministers welcomed the production of this Manual as a valuable resource in legislative drafting across the Commonwealth and as a guide in encouraging member countries to devise their own local legislative drafting manuals, guidelines or handbooks. Ministers endorsed the proposal for the Manual to be a pan-Commonwealth legislative drafting manual and mandated the Secretariat to finalise the draft.</p>

<p>The present publication was extensively rewritten and updated in 2016 and 2017 by Mr Roger Rose, to reflect contemporary style and practice across the Commonwealth. The draft Manual was sent to Offices of Attorneys General in all Commonwealth member countries for review and comment, and has been enriched by input and expertise from across the Commonwealth.</p>

<p>The <em>Commonwealth Legislative Drafting Manual</em> is intended to be used as a practical tool to assist legislative counsel, in particular those in the early stages of their careers. Although hands-on practice and experience are critical for the development of skilled legislative drafters, a reference guide that sets out common drafting approaches offers a 'go-to' source for drafters requiring an overview of the craft, as well as suggested solutions to frequently encountered challenges. In this respect, the Manual is also a key resource for the design and delivery of legislative drafting training programmes.</p>

<p>As a Commonwealth product largely in the common law tradition, it is hoped that the Manual will stimulate further the interest of drafters in practising their skill, as well as providing a sense of the shared heritage in legislative drafting across the Commonwealth. The Manual provides general guidance, and must be read in each jurisdiction in the context of its own Constitution and law, and to some extent its own house style. It is intended to supplement existing textbooks and local and regional manuals. Some checklists are provided, but for more comprehensive ones reference to a standard textbook such as Thornton's <em>Legislative Drafting</em> is recommended.</p>

<p>Some general conventions are followed in the Manual:</p>

<ul>
    <li>The expression 'legislative counsel' is used to refer to those who have the general task of drafting, although the term 'drafter' is occasionally used in relation to specific aspects of the skill, in recognition of the fact that others might also need from time to time to practise it.</li>
    <li>Although reference is made mainly to primary legislation, except where otherwise indicated the same principles apply to the drafting of subsidiary legislation.</li>
    <li>As the term 'subsidiary legislation' is more commonly used in the Commonwealth generally, it is used throughout rather than alternatives such as 'statutory instruments'.</li>
    <li>Although technically legislative counsel are drafting Bills and hence 'clauses', reference is made throughout, in most instances, to Acts, sections and subsections.</li>
    <li>Gender-neutral drafting is adopted in both the text and illustrations (unless the illustration is from old legislation). This style is further explained in Chapter 10.</li>
</ul>

<p>Following modern Commonwealth drafting practice, except where an old provision is used or a draft is inserted to illustrate a point, if examples are given:</p>

<ul>
    <li>the auxiliary 'must' is used to indicate the creation of an obligation, rather than the traditional 'shall' (the rationale for this is explained in Chapter 5); and</li>
    <li>provisos are dispensed with (explained in Chapter 7).</li>
</ul>

<p>The Manual contains 20 chapters, which address all aspects of legislative drafting, from basic drafting elements and conventions to guidance on particular legislative forms, such as preliminary, final, and penal provisions, as well as specific legislation types, such as licensing and financial legislation. The Manual further places the legislative drafting process in context, through the inclusion of appendices on the preparation of Cabinet submissions, the formulation of drafting instructions and suggested approaches to the translation of policy.</p>

<p>As the Manual is a living document, providing guidance in an ever-developing field, readers are warmly invited to contact the Commonwealth Secretariat with suggestions for corrections, amendments or updates accordingly.</p>


<h1>Acknowledgements</h1>

<p>An immense amount of work by various people and institutions, to whom the Commonwealth Secretariat is most grateful, has gone into the development of this publication. The Secretariat is greatly indebted to the Hon. Justice V.C.R.A. Crabbe who, as has already been indicated, was given the task of producing the original draft <em>Commonwealth Legislative Drafting Manual</em>.</p>

<p>The Secretariat's deep gratitude goes to Roger Rose, former First Parliamentary Counsel, Kenya, and Director of Studies for the RIPA Legislative Drafting Courses, London, and consultant, who worked tirelessly and selflessly to produce this publication. The Secretariat is most grateful to the CALC Working Group whose invaluable and insightful comments helped to enrich the publication. The Working Group comprised Peter Quiggin, the erstwhile President of CALC, and various CALC members: Theresa Johnson (Hong Kong), Adrian Hogarth (UK), and Brenda King of Northern Ireland who has just been elected as the new President of CALC.</p>

<p>The Secretariat is equally indebted to the following Governments of some of our member countries who also commented on the draft publication: Australia (through CALC), Botswana, Cameroon, Lesotho, Mauritius, Montserrat, The United Kingdom (also through CALC), and Zambia.</p>

<p>The support and apt contributions of Katalaina Sapolu, Director of the Rule of Law Division of the Secretariat, Steven Malby, Head of the Law and Development Section and Elizabeth Bakibinga-Gaswaga, Legal Adviser, Rule of Law Division, were invaluable in finalising this work, as were those of Segametsi Mothibatsela, Legal Adviser, Rule of Law Division, who worked closely with Roger Rose and managed the project. It would be remiss of the Secretariat to overlook the professional and timely advice of its publications and design team, particularly Alison Arnold, Manager, Design and Production, Hugh Gulland, Design and Production Officer, Sherry Dixon, Publications Manager, and Christina Woollatt, Publications Assistant.</p>

<p>The Secretariat apologises to anyone whom it has inadvertently omitted to mention, and wishes to convey its sincere gratitude for their invaluable contribution.</p>


<h1>Contents</h1>
<ul>
    <li>Foreword</li>
    <li>Preface</li>
    <li>Acknowledgements</li>
    <li><strong>1 What is Legislation and why is it Drafted the Way it is?</strong>
        <ul>
            <li>1.1 What is legislation?</li>
            <li>1.2 How is legislation created?</li>
            <li>1.3 Why is legislation drafted in the way it is?</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li><strong>2 The Role of Legislative Counsel</strong>
        <ul>
            <li>2.1 Analysis and understanding of what the policy-makers require</li>
            <li>2.2 Effective communication of the intentions of the policy-makers</li>
            <li>2.3 Specific attributes of effective communication</li>
            <li>2.4 Constraints on legislative counsel</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li><strong>3 Background Legislation</strong>
        <ul>
            <li>3.1 The Constitution</li>
            <li>3.2 The Interpretation Act</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li><strong>4 The Basic Elements of a Legislative Sentence</strong>
        <ul>
            <li>4.1 Legal subject</li>
            <li>4.2 Legal action</li>
            <li>4.3 Context</li>
            <li>4.4 Prominence for the legal subject</li>
            <li>4.5 Prominence for the legal action</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li><strong>5 Modern Commonwealth Conventions in Legislative Drafting</strong>
        <ul>
            <li>5.1 The need for consistency and conciseness</li>
            <li>5.2 Who is affected by the rule?</li>
            <li>5.3 What is required or permitted?</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li><strong>6 Plain Language Drafting</strong>
        <ul>
            <li>6.1 Introduction</li>
            <li>6.2 Reasons why legislation may fail to communicate clearly</li>
            <li>6.3 General objective of plain English in drafting legislation</li>
            <li>6.4 The most common specific problems that need to be addressed</li>
            <li>6.5 The aims of plain English in legislation</li>
            <li>6.6 Words and phrases to avoid or use with care</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li><strong>7 Structuring Legislative Drafts</strong>
        <ul>
            <li>7.1 Sentences</li>
            <li>7.2 Paragraphs</li>
            <li>7.3 Grouping provisions in an Act</li>
            <li>7.4 Linking devices</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li><strong>8 Punctuation (and Capitalisation)</strong>
        <ul>
            <li>8.1 Full stop</li>
            <li>8.2 Colon</li>
            <li>8.3 Dash</li>
            <li>8.4 Semi-colon</li>
            <li>8.5 Quotation marks (or inverted commas)</li>
            <li>8.6 Brackets</li>
            <li>8.7 Hyphen</li>
            <li>8.8 Apostrophe</li>
            <li>8.9 Comma</li>
            <li>8.10 Capital letters</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li><strong>9 Definitions and Interpretation Provisions</strong>
        <ul>
            <li>9.1 Introduction</li>
            <li>9.2 Definitions and other interpretation provisions generally</li>
            <li>9.3 Different kinds of interpretation provisions and definitions</li>
            <li>9.4 Writing definitions</li>
            <li>9.5 Where particular care is needed in definitions</li>
            <li>9.6 Where do interpretation provisions go?</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li><strong>10 Words to use with Special Care (and Other Drafting Problems)</strong>
        <ul>
            <li>10.1 Introduction</li>
            <li>10.2 'And' and 'Or'</li>
            <li>10.3 'Which' and 'that'</li>
            <li>10.4 'All', 'any', 'each' and 'every'</li>
            <li>10.5 'Such'</li>
            <li>10.6 Singular and plural</li>
            <li>10.7 Elliptical writing (omission of words which are to be implied)</li>
            <li>10.8 Indeterminate terms</li>
            <li>10.9 Gender-Neutral Drafting</li>
            <li>10.10 Expressing time</li>
            <li>10.11 Expressing numbers</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li><strong>11 The Legislative Scheme: Principles Governing the Type of Legislation Required and the Ordering of Its Provisions</strong>
        <ul>
            <li>11.1 Fundamental questions to be answered</li>
            <li>11.2 A logical structure to legislation</li>
            <li>11.3 The logical sequence of sections within a Part</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li><strong>12 Introductory and Preliminary Provisions</strong>
        <ul>
            <li>12.1 Introductory Provisions</li>
            <li>12.2 Preliminary provisions</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li><strong>13 Final Provisions</strong>
        <ul>
            <li>13.1 Repeals</li>
            <li>13.2 Transitional and savings provisions</li>
            <li>13.3 Schedules</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li><strong>14 Penal Provisions</strong>
        <ul>
            <li>14.1 General formulae</li>
            <li>14.2 Different types of penalties</li>
            <li>14.3 Parties to offences</li>
            <li>14.4 Strict liability in criminal law</li>
            <li>14.5 Shifting the burden of proof</li>
            <li>14.6 General matters concerning offences and penalties</li>
            <li>14.7 Other matters consequent on conviction</li>
            <li>14.8 Administrative penalties</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li><strong>15 Delegated Powers to Make Legislation</strong>
        <ul>
            <li>15.1 Why are powers to legislate delegated?</li>
            <li>15.2 What form does subsidiary legislation take?</li>
            <li>15.3 Questions about delegation which need to be considered by legislative counsel</li>
            <li>15.4 How does the legislature supervise the making of subsidiary legislation?</li>
            <li>15.5 Drafting subsidiary legislation</li>
            <li>15.6 Typical layouts of subsidiary legislation, and executive instruments that are in some jurisdictions treated as subsidiary legislation</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li><strong>16 Amending Legislation</strong>
        <ul>
            <li>16.1 How may statutes be amended?</li>
            <li>16.2 Direct (or textual) and indirect methods of amending</li>
            <li>16.3 Substantive and consequential amendments</li>
            <li>16.4 Amendment, or repeal and replacement?</li>
            <li>16.5 Retrospectivity of amendments</li>
            <li>16.6 Drafting textual amendments</li>
            <li>16.7 Renumbering</li>
            <li>16.8 Punctuation</li>
            <li>16.9 Indentation and spacing</li>
            <li>16.10 Style</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li><strong>17 Specific Types of Application</strong>
        <ul>
            <li>17.1 Retrospective and retroactive provisions</li>
            <li>17.2 Extra-territorial legislation</li>
            <li>17.3 Binding the government</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li><strong>18 Statutory Corporations</strong>
        <ul>
            <li>18.1 Functions of statutory corporations</li>
            <li>18.2 Terminology traditionally used</li>
            <li>18.3 Corporate or non-corporate?</li>
            <li>18.4 Features of a body corporate</li>
            <li>18.5 Establishment of a body corporate</li>
            <li>18.6 Drafting provisions to establish a statutory corporation</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li><strong>19 Licensing Legislation</strong>
        <ul>
            <li>19.1 Introduction</li>
            <li>19.2 The purposes of licensing and registration</li>
            <li>19.3 The contents of licensing legislation</li>
            <li>19.4 Typical transitional and savings provisions relating to licences</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li><strong>20 Financial Legislation</strong>
        <ul>
            <li>20.1 Introduction</li>
            <li>20.2 Government accounting</li>
            <li>20.3 Government expenditure</li>
            <li>20.4 Government borrowing, guarantees and lending</li>
            <li>20.5 Taxation</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li><strong>Appendix A: Legislative Procedure and Preparation</strong></li>
    <li><strong>Appendix B: Guidelines for the Preparation of Cabinet Submissions</strong></li>
    <li><strong>Appendix C: Drafting Instructions</strong></li>
    <li><strong>Appendix D: Suggested Approaches to Translation of Policy</strong></li>
    <li><strong>Appendix E: Suggested Approaches to Drafting</strong></li>
</ul>


<h1>Chapter 1<br>What is Legislation and why is it Drafted the Way it is?</h1>

<h2>1.1 What is legislation?</h2>

<p>If asked to define what is meant by 'legislation', most people would probably say that it is 'a set of written rules for the conduct of society'. That is of course correct in very general terms, but leaving aside the fact that rule-making authorities exist at different levels in society (national, state, municipal and other authorities such as those set up to manage airports and harbours, even down to local sports or social clubs of various kinds), the term 'legislation' is usually used to mean rules that are made by a body that has been given the power under the Constitution to make them. This body goes under a variety of names in different jurisdictions but it is typically referred to as 'Parliament'.</p>

<p>In view of the fact that Parliament often delegates the power to make subsidiary legislation in the form of regulations, by-laws, etc. (see Chapter 15), it could more accurately be said that legislation consists of 'written rules for the conduct of society made by or under the authority of Parliament'.</p>

<h3>1.1.1 'Rules'</h3>

<p>However, this definition still does not tell the whole story, for when reference is made to legislation it is to sets of rules, both mandatory and empowering, with which those who are affected must comply, or which set out the limits of powers or duties of corporations or of individuals who are charged with administering or enforcing the legislation. These rules typically contain, in modern writing, the words 'must' or 'may', and where they are mandatory there is usually a liability to some sort of penal sanction for failure to comply with them.</p>

<p>Texts that give guidance and advice on how to do certain things or how to conduct oneself in given situations (often made by subsidiary legislation and called guidelines or codes of practice), even though they might contain the words 'must' or 'may', and even though of considerable importance, do not normally qualify for inclusion in a definition of legislation. They do not <strong>in themselves</strong> directly lead to liability for penal sanctions, although in some cases non-compliance with them might constitute evidence of contravention of a rule somewhere else. For example:</p>

<p>A public official must refuse to accept any gift or hospitality which might place him or her under an improper obligation, or might reasonably appear to do so.</p>

<p>A public prosecutor must not sanction a prosecution unless:<br>
(a) there is sufficient evidence to provide a realistic prospect of conviction; and<br>
(b) it is in the public interest that the case should be proceeded with.</p>

<p>Even though mandatory words are used, the first of these provisions, which is taken from guidelines on conflict of interest, contains matters that are tentative (as evidenced by the auxiliary 'might'). They require context and interpretation to be fully assessed. In the second example, quite clearly there are a range of professional judgements to be made. Although each direction is precise, breach would not directly involve a legal sanction. It is said that these texts are 'guiding' rather than 'binding'.</p>

<h3>1.1.2 'For the conduct of society'</h3>

<p>This phrase implies that rules are made for <strong>everybody</strong> in society, but in reality very little legislation applies to society as a whole. The body of general criminal law of course does, as do other general requirements for the regulation of society such as birth, marriage and death registration, electoral and census law, and liability to income tax; but far more often rules are made for <strong>particular sections</strong> of society. This can easily be illustrated by taking a random series of widely differing matters that would be the subject of Acts of Parliament in a typical jurisdiction:</p>

<ul>
    <li>adoption of children</li>
    <li>banking and financial institutions</li>
    <li>factories</li>
    <li>firearms</li>
    <li>medical practitioners</li>
    <li>mining</li>
    <li>the police</li>
    <li>quarantine</li>
    <li>road transport</li>
    <li>stamp duties</li>
    <li>town planning</li>
    <li>wildlife.</li>
</ul>

<p>So a working definition of legislation can now be created:</p>

<p><strong>Rules for the conduct of society, or more usually particular sections of it, that are binding in their effect and made in written form by or under the authority of Parliament.</strong></p>

<p>For most general purposes that will do, although it can be noted in passing that legislation, besides laying down requirements with respect to conduct, also does other things:</p>

<ul>
    <li>It provides mechanisms that enable legally enforceable relationships to be entered into (e.g. charities, civil marriages, companies, trustees) and regulates those relationships</li>
    <li>It regulates non-statutory relationships between people (e.g. buyers and sellers of goods, employers and employees, landlords and tenants)</li>
    <li>It establishes statutory corporations and defines their functions and powers.</li>
</ul>

<p>A single piece of legislation will sometimes seek to incorporate more than one of these features.</p>

<p>Legislation does not of course form the whole body of law that applies to a given jurisdiction. In many areas the law has been developed from precedents in case law (i.e. judge-made law), especially in contract, tort and conflict of laws.</p>

<h2>1.2 How is legislation created?</h2>

<p>The body charged under the Constitution with executive power to oversee peace and good order in society is typically known under the Constitution as 'the Executive' but is usually referred to both in legislation and in general writing as 'the <strong>Government</strong>'.</p>

<p>A framework of legislation will of course be in place in any jurisdiction, but as societies develop and technology increases it will be necessary to make changes to it from time to time. To this extent the Government needs to take steps to create new, or amend existing, legislation. It cannot itself create that legislation, for this function is constitutionally the province of the legislature. As already noted, this body is usually referred to broadly as <strong>Parliament</strong>.<sup>1</sup></p>

<p>Laws are therefore created by Parliament passing Bills that when enacted into legislation become known generally as Acts (in dependent territories, these are often known as Ordinances or Laws) or, more broadly, statutes. In jurisdictions that follow the Westminster style of governance these Bills are introduced into Parliament mainly by the Government, although some Commonwealth jurisdictions have made constitutional changes that require legislation to originate to a large extent in Parliament itself. The principles that apply to drafting, and which are examined in the subsequent chapters of this Manual, are however exactly the same.</p>

<p>In the common law system the role of the judiciary (i.e. <strong>the courts and tribunals</strong>) is restricted to interpretation and application of legislation. They will not add to, diminish, vary or qualify requirements laid down in legislation, unless in the course of declaring it to be in some way incompatible with the Constitution, or in the case of subsidiary legislation, the enabling legislation.</p>

<p><strong>Appendices A</strong> and <strong>B</strong> set out in some detail typical outline procedure for the preparation of legislation.</p>

<p><sup>1</sup> Technically, in the Westminster model of government there is a difference as, following the UK (unwritten) constitution, 'Parliament' consists of <strong>both</strong> the Head of State <strong>and</strong> the legislature. However, it is convenient in this Manual to use this term.</p>

<h2>1.3 Why is legislation drafted in the way it is?</h2>

<p>The fundamental principle behind the common law is that everyone may do as he or she wishes unless the law provides otherwise.</p>

<p>Bills proposing legislation must therefore be drafted in sufficient detail to prescribe as precisely as possible the exact nature of the obligations, duties, rights, powers or privileges being imposed or given. They must set out fully and unambiguously what is required of those to be affected by the legislation, and thus must include not only the necessary rules themselves but any qualifications, exemptions or other matters relevant to their observance.</p>

<p>This is more difficult in practice than it sounds, and attainment of a high degree of proficiency in legislative drafting requires experience and skill. It is the function of this Manual to assist legislative counsel to attain the necessary degree of precision.</p>


<h1>Chapter 2<br>The Role of Legislative Counsel</h1>

<h2>2.1 Analysis and understanding of what the policy-makers require</h2>

<p>Although legislative counsel may have been consulted, or even involved, at the policy-making stage, the formal starting point in the process of translating policy into legislation should be the reception of drafting instructions (see <strong>Appendix C</strong> for recommended contents). Counsel should, in obtaining the necessary depth of understanding of the policy, be prepared to ask searching questions. He or she is, however, under a professional duty to look critically at the instructions and to point out where there seem to be aspects of the policy that might be in conflict with the Constitution or other legislation, or where aspects of the proposed legislation might for some reason be difficult to operate or enforce.</p>

<h2>2.2 Effective communication of the intentions of the policy-makers</h2>

<p>The task is then for counsel to do his or her utmost to effectively communicate the intentions of the policy-makers to those who will use or be affected by the legislation. In determining how a policy statement is to be translated into a legal rule, it is useful for counsel to bear in mind the following rhyme of Rudyard Kipling:</p>

<p>I keep six honest serving men<br>
(They taught me all I knew);<br>
Their names are WHAT and WHY and WHEN<br>
And HOW and WHERE and WHO.</p>

<p>This will help to understand the full extent of the matters that the rule will need to cover. Naturally, some questions are fundamental:</p>

<ul>
    <li><strong>Why</strong> is it necessary to legislate as proposed?</li>
    <li><strong>Who</strong> is to be affected by it?</li>
</ul>

<p>although the answers to these questions may be obvious from the context. Others will be concerned more with matters of detail:</p>

<ul>
    <li><strong>When, where and how</strong> will the persons concerned be affected?</li>
    <li><strong>What</strong> exactly is required of them?</li>
</ul>

<p>It needs to be emphasised that, contrary to what many people believe, in legislative drafting <strong>there is no need for special language</strong>. Although there is occasionally a need to use a technical word or expression (e.g. <em>ex parte</em>, <em>mens rea</em>, <em>puisne judge</em>), in general the language of legislation is the same as that used in ordinary formal English, i.e. that of textbooks, newspaper leading articles, professional reports, articles and opinions, and professional and business letters generally.</p>

<p><strong>Appendix D</strong> sets out some suggested approaches to the process of translating the relevant policy into workable legislative provisions.</p>

<h2>2.3 Specific attributes of effective communication</h2>

<p>There are nevertheless greater constraints on the use of language by legislative counsel, and in order to effectively communicate policy it is necessary for it to be:</p>

<ul>
    <li><strong>CLEAR</strong><br>
    using direct, modern modes of expression.</li>
    <li><strong>COMPREHENSIBLE</strong><br>
    to those to whom the legislation is directed so that they can grasp its meaning as quickly as possible.</li>
</ul>

<p>Aspects relevant to these two attributes will be considered in particular in Chapters 6 ('Plain language drafting') and 7 ('Structuring legislative drafts').</p>

<ul>
    <li><strong>CONCISE</strong><br>
    with no unnecessary or repetitious words or phrases.<br>
    More than in any other kind of formal writing, it is necessary to write 'tight' prose. This means reducing the text to the minimum number of words needed in a sentence or series of sentences to explain their effect. Loosely drafted sentences incorporating more words than are needed to get a message across can be unduly complex or tiresome to read, and they increase the likelihood of inconsistent use of words and expressions, and hence ambiguity. Note for example the following turgid sentence:<br>
    <br>
    A licensed dealer must always keep displayed in a place where it can easily be seen in the licensed premises the licence authorising him or her to undertake the relevant trade, profession or business.<br>
    <br>
    This can probably be reduced to no more than:<br>
    <br>
    A dealer must display the licence in a prominent place in the licensed premises.</li>
</ul>

<ul>
    <li><strong>CONSISTENT</strong><br>
    using as far as possible the same style throughout, and with the same words or expressions used to mean the same things.<br>
    It is an important rule of drafting any type of legal document, and especially legislative rules, that the same words and expressions are used to mean the same things, as there is a presumption that the use of different ones is intentional and indicates a shift in meaning (see 'judicial approaches', section 2.4).<br>
    The potential for confusion can easily be seen in the commonly required legislative provision for the giving of permission to do certain things in a certain way; it would for example be easy for the drafter to drift into unthinking use of different words to indicate permission – 'allow', 'permit', 'license', 'consent', 'let', 'sanction', 'recognise' – whether these words be verbs or, with any necessary modifications, nouns.</li>
</ul>

<p>In practice, these last two attributes require rigorous consideration and reconsideration of drafted texts. Aspects relevant to them will be considered further in Chapter 5 ('Modern Commonwealth conventions in legislative drafting').</p>

<ul>
    <li><strong>CERTAIN</strong><br>
    without ambiguity, so that those to be affected are left in no doubt about the extent of their duties, obligations, powers, discretions or rights, or the procedures required to be followed in given circumstances.</li>
    <li><strong>COMPLETE</strong><br>
    covering all reasonably foreseeable circumstances.<br>
    Even more importantly than with other kinds of formal writing, legislative counsel is required to cover everything necessarily needed to be covered, so that the resulting rules are as complete as they reasonably can be and do not contain what drafters call 'loopholes'. At the same time, he or she must take care to ensure that the rules produced do not inadvertently apply to persons and situations to which they are not intended to apply.</li>
</ul>

<p>In practice, these latter two attributes of legislation constitute by far the greatest challenge to counsel; but they are attributes relating essentially to analysis rather than use of language.</p>

<p>These '6 Cs' of communication are not necessarily in watertight compartments and there may be some overlap. For example, if <strong>unclear</strong> language is used, the result may also be to an extent both <strong>incomprehensible</strong> and <strong>uncertain</strong> (for examples, see Chapter 6).</p>

<p><strong>Appendix E</strong> sets out the suggested approach legislative counsel need to take to achieve these 6Cs.</p>

<h2>2.4 Constraints on legislative counsel</h2>

<p>Drafting legislation has been likened to steering a ship around a series of underground obstacles. Some of the main obstacles, or constraints, are:</p>

<ul>
    <li><strong>The Constitution</strong><br>
    There must be consistency with fundamental rights and freedoms, and the separation of powers.<br>
    These will be considered further in Chapter 3.</li>
    <li><strong>The existing law</strong><br>
    Inconsistencies in drafting can lead to potential duplication of provisions covering the same areas, and to difficulties with concepts such as dominant and subservient provisions or even implied repeal. These concepts will be considered in Chapters 7 ('Structuring legislative drafts') and 13 ('Final provisions').</li>
    <li><strong>Judicial approaches</strong> to legislation, and judicial assumptions, including the rules of interpretation, the most fundamental of which are:
        <ul>
            <li>individual provisions are to be read in the context of the whole statute;</li>
            <li>each word is to be given a meaning;</li>
            <li>the same words or expressions are to be given the same meanings, different words or expressions are to be given different meanings;</li>
            <li>a specific provision overrides a general one.</li>
        </ul>
    The last two of these assumptions will be covered in Chapters 5 ('Modern Commonwealth conventions in legislative drafting') and 11 ('Principles governing the order of provisions').</li>
    <li><strong>Drafting instructions</strong><br>
    Where these are deficient or poorly considered, there may be a greatly increased time taken in preparing legislation as attempts are made to clarify policy issues.</li>
    <li><strong>Local drafting house style</strong><br>
    This may inhibit a more modern approach to aspects of drafting style, especially where legislation that has been on the statute book for some time is being amended.</li>
    <li><strong>Available parliamentary time</strong><br>
    If there is a large amount of urgent legislation, and insufficient time for its preparation, there may be the need to attempt to squeeze largely unrelated matters into a single Bill.</li>
</ul>


<h1>Chapter 3<br>Background Legislation</h1>

<p>The Constitution and the Interpretation Act are of fundamental importance to legislative counsel, who must be completely familiar with the detailed provisions of both.</p>

<h2>3.1 The Constitution</h2>

<h3>3.1.1 General duty of legislative counsel</h3>

<p>Legislation which is held to be inconsistent with the Constitution will be void to the extent of the inconsistency. Great care needs to be exercised to ensure that challenges on the ground of lack of constitutionality are kept to a minimum.</p>

<p>Counsel's duty is therefore to:</p>
<ul>
    <li>identify constitutional issues that may arise</li>
    <li>alert Government to these</li>
    <li>ensure so far as possible that legislation is not open to constitutional challenge</li>
    <li>ensure compliance with any formal or procedural matters, for example with regard to money Bills (these will be considered in Chapter 20)</li>
    <li>be prepared to suggest alternatives where instructions are considered to be inconsistent with the Constitution.</li>
</ul>

<p>The last of these calls for considerable ingenuity, tact and skill on the part of legislative counsel. Alternatives might include:</p>
<ul>
    <li>modifying the proposal to permit conformity with the Constitution</li>
    <li>dropping the proposal</li>
    <li>proceeding with the proposal, while taking the risk of successful challenge in the courts</li>
    <li>or even, in an appropriate case, seeking to amend the Constitution.</li>
</ul>

<h3>3.1.2 Where constitutional issues are most likely to arise</h3>

<p>Constitutional issues are most likely to arise in legislation concerned with or involving the types of matter considered below.</p>

<p><strong>Separation of powers</strong><br>
The following are examples of cases in which the courts have found legislation to have offended against this principle:</p>
<ul>
    <li>allocation to the executive of a discretion to decide the severity of punishment or to fix the penalty for persons convicted of criminal offences [a judicial function – <em>Hinds v R</em> [1976] 1 All ER 353 (Jamaica)]</li>
    <li>conferring power on the executive to nominate the judges who were to exercise judicial power in a particular case – <em>R v Liyanage</em> (1962) 64 CNLR 313 (Sri Lanka)</li>
    <li>reversal by the legislature of judicial decisions determining the rights of particular individuals or of their acquittal in a criminal case – <em>Mahboob v Government of Mauritius</em> [1983] 9 CLB 81</li>
    <li>reversing retrospectively a judicial interpretation of a statutory provision – <em>Diagoras Development Ltd v National Bank of Greece</em> [1987] 13 CLB 38 (Cyprus).</li>
</ul>

<p><strong>The rule of law</strong><br>
This requires that:</p>
<ul>
    <li>interference with activities is permissible only in so far as authorised by law</li>
    <li>powers must not confer unfettered or arbitrary discretion</li>
    <li>powers given must be proportionate to the problems they address (so that they go no further than is reasonably required in order to achieve the desired goals)</li>
    <li>powers should be subject to judicial review.</li>
</ul>

<p><strong>Exceptional powers</strong><br>
For example to hold suspects for extended periods without charge or (even more exceptionally) to detain them indefinitely without trial.</p>

<p><strong>Delegation of legislative powers</strong><br>
Powers must be <strong>delegated, not transferred</strong>, and a very wide power to make subsidiary legislation might be held to offend against this. This is considered in Chapter 15.</p>

<p><strong>Curtailment of fundamental rights and freedoms</strong><br>
There is a growing body of internationally recognised case law on this subject. Certain of these are typically absolute (no slavery, torture or inhuman or degrading punishment) while others (e.g. freedom of expression or association; non-discrimination) are qualified to the extent that legislative restrictions to them may typically be allowed where they are:</p>
<p>reasonably required in the interest of [defence], [public order], [public morality], [public health] or for the purpose of protecting the rights and freedoms of others, and except so far as [the measure] is shown not to be justifiable in a democratic society.</p>

<h3>3.1.3 Particular constitutional constraints</h3>

<p>Legislative counsel need to ask questions about, and be aware of, the following principal matters likely to affect the laws:</p>

<p><strong>On legislative functions</strong></p>
<ul>
    <li>Is there restriction on retrospective operation of criminal law and penalties?</li>
    <li>Are there requirements with regard to methods of introduction of particular forms of legislation (e.g. money Bills, private members' Bills; private or local Bills), and must some Bills be introduced into the lower House?</li>
    <li>What is the procedure where there is deadlock (e.g. between Houses or after use of a power of veto)?</li>
</ul>

<p><strong>On judicial functions</strong></p>
<ul>
    <li>Are there provisions to the effect that hearings must be by an independent and impartial tribunal, and within a reasonable time?</li>
    <li>Is the jurisdiction of inferior courts stipulated or is this left to be prescribed by an Act of Parliament?</li>
    <li>Is an ouster of judicial review prohibited?</li>
</ul>

<p><strong>On executive functions</strong></p>
<ul>
    <li>How is the assignment of responsibility to Ministers to be carried out (e.g. by formal instrument)?</li>
</ul>

<h2>3.2 The Interpretation Act</h2>

<h3>3.2.1 General</h3>

<p>An Interpretation Act is a fundamental aid to drafting legislation. Short titles for this legislation vary somewhat in Commonwealth jurisdictions (e.g. Interpretation and General Provisions Act; General Provisions Act), but 'Interpretation Act' is the most common. As its title implies, it contains a number of basic rules relating to the construction of legislation, but also many more relating to more fundamental things such as application and commencement and, typically, a number of definitions of common words in general legislative use (e.g. 'contravene', 'document', 'land', 'person', 'prescribed', 'vessel').</p>

<p>The Act will be expressed to apply to all legislation (except for the Constitution, unless the Constitution itself expressly otherwise states) 'unless a contrary intention appears' (see below).</p>

<h3>3.2.2 Basic questions answered by the Interpretation Act</h3>

<p>Typically an Interpretation Act will provide answers to the following questions:</p>
<ul>
    <li>What are the basic terms used to refer to legislation (e.g. 'Act', 'enactment', 'subsidiary legislation', 'written law') and how are these defined?</li>
    <li>When does primary legislation (i.e. Acts) and subsidiary legislation come into force?</li>
    <li>When legislation is amended, how does this affect references to it in other legislation?</li>
    <li>What consequences flow from repealing legislation?</li>
    <li>What are the normal incidents of statutory powers and duties (e.g. performance from time to time as occasion requires; incidental implied powers; power to act by a simple majority)?</li>
    <li>How is time to be reckoned?</li>
    <li>What general provisions apply to penalties?</li>
    <li>Do written laws bind the Government? (See further, Chapter 17.)</li>
</ul>

<h3>3.2.3 The importance of an Interpretation Act</h3>

<p><strong>Standardisation of legislative expression</strong><br>
The following are the general definitions typically provided by an Interpretation Act:</p>
<ul>
    <li>official authorities and officers – 'Minister', 'police officer', 'public office'</li>
    <li>words and expressions which have no clear-cut meaning but which are to be given a settled one for legislative purposes – 'financial year', 'prescribed'</li>
    <li>words which have a usual meaning but which are to carry an extended meaning in legislation – 'act' (extended to include an omission), 'oath' (to include an affirmation), 'person' (to include a body of persons), 'sell' (to include offer for sale)</li>
    <li>definitions that are intended to give precision to commonly used words or expressions that are indeterminate or capable of more than one meaning – 'land', 'writing'</li>
    <li>convenient shorthand expressions – 'contravene', 'prescribed'.</li>
</ul>

<p><strong>Consistency in legislative style and reduction of repetition</strong></p>
<ul>
    <li>references within written laws and provisions in them (e.g. a reference to a section in an Act means a reference to a section of the Act in which the reference occurs, thus eliminating the need to refer to 'section 6 <strong>of this Act</strong>', unless ambiguity might arise)</li>
    <li>imposition of penalties (see Chapter 14, 'Penal provisions')</li>
    <li>exercise of power before written law comes into force (to allow for, e.g., the appointment of a Board or supervising authority).</li>
</ul>

<h3>3.2.4 'Unless a contrary intention appears' and similar phrases</h3>

<p>A contrary intention can be indicated:</p>
<ul>
    <li>expressly, by redefining a word or expression (e.g. 'land', 'writing')</li>
    <li>by clear evidence of a contrary intention to that expressed in the Interpretation Act rule (as by requiring a stated percentage of votes required to act, displacing a rule about action on a majority vote)</li>
    <li>by placing the matter in a context in which sense can be made of the provision only if a contrary meaning is given, as by displacement of a definition that 'person' includes a body corporate in the case of offences capable of being committed only by individuals (e.g. sexual offences or those involving physical violence to the person).</li>
</ul>

<h3>3.2.5 How well do others know the Interpretation Act?</h3>

<p>Even though background rules are provided in the Act, consideration needs to be given to the desirability of repeating some of them in certain types of legislation in order to give a complete picture, for example in legislation setting up statutory corporations (see Chapter 18).</p>


<h1>Chapter 4<br>The Basic Elements of a Legislative Sentence</h1>

<p>In the early part of the nineteenth century, George Coode formulated basic principles concerning the aim of legislation and the basic composition of a legislative sentence that are relevant today. He found that legislation aims to regulate relationships between persons by securing a benefit to a person or class of persons. It does this:</p>
<ul>
    <li><strong>directly</strong>, by conferring a right, privilege or power on a person or persons or</li>
    <li><strong>indirectly</strong>, by imposing an obligation or liability on others.</li>
</ul>

<p>It follows that a legislative sentence must therefore prescribe the limits of the right, privilege, power, obligation or liability, and designate the circumstances in which it arises. All grammatical sentences must have a subject (the person or thing to be affected by the sentence) and a predicate (what is said about the subject). Some refinement to this simple proposition is necessary in a legislative sentence and in practice such a sentence must have:</p>
<ul>
    <li>a subject (Coode referred to the 'legal subject')</li>
    <li>a predicate (Coode called this the 'legal action') and</li>
    <li>(in most cases, and unless the sentence would be too long as a result) a context.</li>
</ul>

<h2>4.1 Legal subject</h2>

<p>This is a convenient term by which to refer to the precise person or categories of person to be affected. As will be seen in Chapter 5, where the rule applies to persons generally, the convention used is to state 'a person'; although the kind of person affected may be stated directly, for example 'a police officer', 'an inspector', 'a licensee'. The legal subject should normally be placed in a prominent position in the sentence:</p>

<p>A person must not enter an infected area.</p>
<p>A police officer may arrest a person trading in a street without a licence.</p>

<p>A <strong>person</strong> (i.e. an individual or group of persons, or a juridical person such as a company, corporation or partnership) <strong>should normally be made the grammatical subject</strong>, although occasionally it will be useful to make use of an inanimate subject.</p>

<p>A contract entered into in contravention of this Act is void.</p>

<p>This may be done so long as the actual person or persons affected by the rule are clear (obviously here they are the parties to a relevant contract). In this way, the drafting is made more concise, for to make a person the legal subject would involve restructuring the words into a much longer sentence:</p>

<p>A person who enters into a contract that is in contravention of this Act may not rely on its provisions, which are void.</p>

<p>However, there is always a danger, when making something other than a person the legal subject, that sight will be lost of the actual person or persons to whom the rule is intended to apply:</p>

<p>Cattle must be confined or tethered in an infected area.</p>
<p>Notice of transfer must be given to the licensing authority within 14 days.</p>

<p>On whom exactly is the duty to confine, or to give notice, placed? The problem lies in the use of the passive voice. While it is not suggested that this never be used (it is sometimes convenient), care needs to be taken to check that it is clear who the person being addressed is. See Chapter 6 for further details.</p>

<p>In practice, the legal subject is usually <strong>modified</strong> to confine the rule to particular persons or things or classes of persons or things (see also the second example above):</p>

<p>A person who is a passenger on a bus…</p>
<p>An advocate qualified under this Part…</p>
<p>A licensee who contravenes subsection (1)…</p>
<p>A certificate of a motor vehicle examiner…</p>
<p>A contract of hire purchase…</p>

<p>Occasionally, more than one legal subject may be contained in the same sentence:</p>

<p>A police officer may require the driver of a motor vehicle to stop where indicated, and the driver must then stop accordingly and switch off the engine of the vehicle.</p>

<h2>4.2 Legal action</h2>

<p>'Legal action' is Coode's technical expression (for what is sometimes called the predicate of a sentence). Coode used it to indicate the way in which the legal subject is to be affected. This is done by use of a verb auxiliary ('must' or 'may' as shown in the examples below – these and other auxiliaries are considered further in Chapter 5). Usually the legal action takes one of two forms:</p>

<p>(a) the precise terms of the act or omission required or permitted:</p>
<p>A person must not enter an infected area.</p>
<p>A police officer may arrest a person trading in a street without a licence</p>
<p>or</p>
<p>(b) the consequences for a person of things done or omitted to be done:</p>
<p>A person who contravenes subsection (1) commits an offence</p>
<p>A convicted person is disqualified from standing for election…</p>
<p>A contract of hire purchase entered into in contravention of this Act is void.</p>

<p>Note in particular that:</p>
<ul>
    <li>the technical term 'legal action' should not be confused with 'activity'</li>
    <li>where an act or omission is required or permitted, the verb should contain the appropriate auxiliary to indicate the nature of the rule</li>
    <li>the present, not the future, tense is used when describing a state of affairs or legal consequence, so that in the above examples 'commits' is correct, not 'shall commit'; 'is disqualified', not 'shall be disqualified'; 'is void', not 'shall be void'</li>
    <li>more than one legal action may be contained in a sentence
        <p>A police officer may require a motor vehicle to stop <strong>and</strong>, if the officer suspects that the driver has consumed alcohol or drugs, require the driver to submit to a breath test.</p>
        <p>A person who contravenes subsection (1) commits an offence <strong>and</strong> is liable to a fine of…</p>
    </li>
</ul>

<h2>4.3 Context</h2>

<p>This is a statement of the circumstances in which the rule is to operate. It is typically done by the use of a context clause:</p>

<p>When an area has been declared an infected area, a person must not enter or leave it.</p>
<p>If the accused is under 14 years of age, the court may direct that the proceedings are to be held in closed court.</p>
<p>A police officer may require a motor vehicle to stop and, if the officer suspects that the driver has consumed alcohol or drugs, require the driver to submit to a breath test.</p>

<p>Note (from the first two examples above) that the subject of the context clause need not be the same as the legal subject of the sentence. Words like 'where', 'when' and 'if' commonly introduce this kind of context.</p>

<p>Sometimes the context involves the setting out of special conditions or exemptions which are to apply:</p>

<p>When an area has been declared an infected area, a person must not enter or leave it, unless authorised to do so by the District Veterinary Officer.</p>
<p>A police officer who suspects that a driver has consumed alcohol or drugs may require the driver to submit to a breath test, unless it appears to the officer that the driver is by reason of injury or otherwise incapable of so doing.</p>

<p>The word 'unless' commonly introduces this kind of context. Where the context is complex and contains a large number of qualifications, it is often better to place it, or the detailed provisions of it, in a separate sentence:</p>

<p>(1) The report of a medical practitioner may be adduced in evidence of the matters contained in it without the need to call the practitioner as a witness if the conditions specified in subsection (2) apply.</p>
<p>(2) The conditions referred to in subsection (1) are that:<br>
(a) the report relates to a person, substance or thing sent or submitted for examination and finding;<br>
(b) it is signed by the practitioner making it;<br>
(c) a copy of the report has been served on the defence at least seven days before the hearing; and<br>
(d) it is produced to the court by the police officer in charge of the case.</p>

<h2>4.4 Prominence for the legal subject</h2>

<p>Modern Commonwealth drafting styles tend to give prominence in a legislative sentence to the legal subject, and this often leads to expressing the context as a modification of the legal subject (see above). Thus, instead of giving prominence to the context clause:</p>

<p>If an investigator has reason to suspect the commission of an offence against this Act, he or she may seize any relevant documents.</p>

<p>Today, this proposition would probably more commonly be drafted as:</p>

<p>An investigator who has reason to suspect the commission of an offence against this Act may seize any relevant documents.</p>

<p>It must be stressed, however, that both have the same meaning in the context and neither is necessarily correct or incorrect. The question for counsel is, as always, 'how well have I communicated the policy?'</p>

<p>One of the most common examples of a legal action that expresses the consequences following an act or omission is in the drafting of offence provisions. In these cases, it is usually better to express the context as a modification of the subject:</p>

<p>A person who makes a false declaration under this section commits an offence.</p>

<p>as the more traditional way of drafting would create a clumsy sentence:</p>

<p>If a person makes a false declaration under this section, that person commits an offence.</p>

<h2>4.5 Prominence for the legal action</h2>

<p>If it facilitates better understanding, it is often desirable to give prominence to the legal action as well. In the above example this would lead to the following:</p>

<p>An investigator may seize any relevant documents where there is reason to suspect the commission of an offence against this Act.</p>

<p>A very common example of the desirability of this kind of prominence is in the drafting of multiple offence provisions. Instead of:</p>

<p>If a person:<br>
(a) ...;<br>
(b) ...;<br>
(c) ...; or<br>
(d) ...,<br>
that person commits an offence and is liable to...</p>
<p>or</p>
<p>A person who:<br>
(a) ...;<br>
(b) ...;<br>
(c) ...; or<br>
(d) ...,<br>
commits an offence and is liable to...</p>

<p>it would often be better drafting (because it communicates the meaning in the clearest possible way) to state:</p>

<p>A person commits an offence if [he or she] [that person]:<br>
(a) ...;<br>
(b) ...:<br>
(c) ...; or<br>
(d) ...,<br>
and is liable to...</p>


<h1>Chapter 5<br>Modern Commonwealth Conventions in Legislative Drafting</h1>

<h2>5.1 The need for consistency and conciseness</h2>

<p>As has already been noted in Chapter 2 ('judicial approaches' in section 2.4), it is an important rule of drafting legislative rules that the same words and expressions are used to mean the same things, as there is a presumption that the use of a different word or expression within the same item of legislation is intentional and indicates a shift in meaning. As has already been noted (see section on 'consistency', Chapter 2.3) the potential for unthinking use of different words to indicate permission cannot be overemphasised:</p>

<p>"allow", "authorise", "permit", "license", "consent", "let", "sanction", "recognise".</p>

<p>But there are other important areas where there are a range of possible words meaning the same or similar things. These can most conveniently be examined by looking in turn at the most common elements of legislative sentences:</p>

<ul>
    <li>Who is affected by the rule?</li>
    <li>What are they required to do or refrain from doing, or permitted to do?</li>
</ul>

<p>There is also a third very common element ('what is the consequence of failing to comply with the rule?'), but this relates to the drafting of penal provisions and will be considered in Chapter 14.</p>

<h2>5.2 Who is affected by the rule?</h2>

<p>A legislative rule usually states that those to whom the rule applies are required to do, or refrain from doing, something or (particularly in the case of administrators or enforcers) have a power or discretion to do or not to do something. As has already been seen (Chapter 4.1), when drafting the requisite rules, the first thing legislative counsel needs to do is to refer to the persons affected.</p>

<p>Bearing in mind that legislation is conventionally drafted in the third person, there are in English a number of possible ways of doing this. If it is necessary to refer to persons generally, any of the following could be written:</p>

<p>"anyone...", "anybody...", "everybody...", "people...", "persons...", "any person...", "every person...", "a person..."</p>

<p>or even the old-fashioned forms 'whoever' or 'whosoever'.</p>

<p>Depending on the shape of the sentence to be drafted, most of these can easily be expressed as negatives: 'no-one...', 'no person...', etc. However, for the sake of consistency it is necessary to choose a particular form and stick to it, and because it best represents plain language and avoids unnecessary use of words of emphasis, modern drafting convention in the Commonwealth when referring to persons generally is to use the form '<strong>a person</strong>'.</p>

<p>Note that the ordinary indefinite article 'a' is used, rather than a more emphatic word such as 'any'. As will be seen in Chapter 10, the use of emphatic words 'any', 'each', 'all' and 'every' needs to be reserved for where a contrast needs to be drawn.</p>

<p>For drafting convenience, the meaning of 'person' is normally extended in an Interpretation Act or equivalent to include not only a natural person but also a body of persons, whether incorporated or unincorporated. In addition, as discussed in Chapter 4, it is often convenient to refer directly to the kind of person affected (for example a police officer, a driver, an investigator).</p>

<h2>5.3 What is required or permitted?</h2>

<p>When referring to what is required, forbidden or permitted, there are also numerous possible drafting alternatives available:</p>

<p><strong>Imposing an obligation to do something</strong><br>
A person has a responsibility to.../has a duty to.../is compelled to.../is required to.../is obliged/obligated to.../is bound to.../has to.../shall.../must...</p>

<p><strong>Imposing an obligation to refrain from doing something</strong><br>
A person is not allowed to.../is required not to.../is not permitted to.../is compelled not to.../is forbidden from.../is constrained not to.../shall not.../must not.../may not.../cannot...</p>

<p><strong>Giving a discretion to do something</strong><br>
A person is allowed to.../is permitted to.../is entitled to.../is authorised to.../is empowered to.../has a discretion to.../may.../is able to.../can...</p>

<p>This can also be done by using a slightly different form relating to permitted or forbidden conduct that was often favoured in the past and is still sometimes seen:</p>

<p>It shall be lawful/unlawful/shall not be lawful/for a person to...</p>
<p>It shall be an offence for a person to...</p>

<p>Again, the need for <strong>consistency</strong>, as well as <strong>conciseness</strong>, has led to conventional uses of the shortest of these forms to the exclusion of the others. Traditionally 'shall' (and 'shall not') have been used to indicate obligation and 'may' to indicate discretion. These are known as verb auxiliaries, or merely 'auxiliaries'. However, for reasons stated below, the conventional uses in modern Commonwealth drafting are:</p>

<p>A person must/must not/may/may not...</p>

<h3>5.3.1 Problems with 'shall', and suggested alternatives</h3>

<p><strong>Indicating an obligation</strong><br>
The first problem is that, even in formal writing, the use of the auxiliary 'shall' to indicate obligation is slightly archaic. A century or more ago it was common when doing so, either in speech or writing, to state:</p>

<p>You shall proceed as directed.<br>
He shall do as he is told.</p>

<p>In modern English these statements sound slightly awkward. Today 'will' tends to be substituted in each case, and indeed in conversational usage the two words have become, to an extent, interchangeable:</p>

<p>You will proceed as directed<br>
He will do as he is told.</p>

<p>In view of the interchangeability of these auxiliaries, there is in both pairs of statements a potential problem of understanding. Do they indicate obligations or are they merely explaining what is going to happen (i.e. the future tense<sup>1</sup>)? Often, particularly in spoken English, the intended meaning will be clear from the context. Nevertheless, if it is intended to indicate obligation, whether in spoken or written, formal or informal, English, the auxiliary '<strong>must</strong>' is usually used. As is noted in Chapter 6, the language used in legislation needs to conform as far as possible to that in ordinary use. So in drafting a legislative rule roughly corresponding to the above statements the following would be modern conventional drafting:</p>

<p>A person involved in a road traffic accident must follow the instructions of a police officer called to the scene.</p>
<p>A driver of a heavy goods vehicle must proceed through a weighbridge as directed by...</p>

<p><sup>1</sup> For an example of where the future tense is used to explain what is expected to happen, see the typical procedure for legislation set out in Appendix A.</p>

<p><strong>Indicating a consequence or explanation</strong><br>
Often when the auxiliary 'shall' has been used in the past, it has not in fact imposed an obligation:</p>

<p>If an application complies with section 3, subsection (1) of this section shall not apply.</p>
<p>A person who contravenes this section shall be guilty of an offence.</p>
<p>In relation to a citizen by naturalisation, section 5 shall have effect as if the reference...</p>
<p>Subsection (3) shall not apply where the court gives leave to make a further application, but such leave shall not be given unless...</p>

<p>Except in the words following 'but' in the last example, each of these rules is merely stating a consequence or giving an explanation, i.e., a state of affairs brought about by, or consequence flowing from, the rule.</p>

<p>In the last example, the negative auxiliary 'shall not' is clearly used in two different senses in the same sentence (something counsel should avoid in order to preserve consistency). The intention in the second part of the sentence is to state what the duties of the court are in the relevant circumstances.</p>

<p><strong>Use of the present tense to indicate states of affairs or consequences</strong><br>
The modern convention when expressing a state of affairs or consequence is to use the <strong>present</strong> tense. Besides being better style, this neatly gives effect to the maxim of construction 'a statute is always speaking'. Thus, in modern drafting, the following would take the place of the above examples:</p>

<p>If the application complies with section 3, subsection (1) of this section does not apply.</p>
<p>A person who contravenes this section is guilty of [<em>or, probably better</em>, commits] an offence.</p>
<p>In relation to a citizen by naturalisation, section 5 has effect as if the reference...</p>
<p>Subsection (3) does not apply where the court gives leave to make a further application, but...</p>

<p>A simple test to determine the way in which 'shall' is used is to ask whether 'must' can meaningfully be inserted in its place. If so, then the modern convention is to do so; if not, then the present tense or some other mode of expression is needed.</p>

<p><strong>Setting out functions and duties</strong><br>
There are further potential problems with the overworked 'shall'. In many cases, it is desired to set out what somebody, usually a Minister, a court or a specified official or body, is required to do. More often than not, the thrust of the provision is not so much to create an obligation or series of obligations (for the operation of the legislation concerned is usually predicated on the doing of the relevant things), but simply to state or list the powers or duties of the person concerned:</p>

<p>The National Heritage Trust shall:<br>
(a) ...;<br>
(b) ...</p>
<p>The objects of the Law Society shall be:<br>
(a) to...;<br>
(b) to...</p>
<p>The Minister shall appoint the Chairman of the Board</p>

<p>or, referring back to one of the original examples noted under the previous heading:</p>

<p>Subsection (3) does not apply where the court gives leave to make a further application, but leave [to make a further application] shall not be given unless...</p>

<p><strong>Use of the present tense to indicate lists of functions or duties</strong><br>
In these kinds of cases, it usually better expresses the sense of the provision to use the present tense in the form 'is to', or 'are to':</p>

<p>The duties of the National Heritage Trust are:<br>
(a) to...;<br>
(b) to...</p>
<p>The objects of the Law Society are:<br>
(a) to...;<br>
(b) to...</p>
<p>The Minister is to appoint the Chairman of the Board</p>
<p>...but leave [to make a further application] is not to be given unless...</p>

<p><strong>Establishing an office, corporation or other thing</strong><br>
The overworked 'shall' has been used here too:</p>

<p>There shall be a Registrar of Antiquities.</p>
<p>The Harbours Authority shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal...</p>
<p>A tax, to be known as "land transaction tax", shall be charged and collected...</p>

<p>In these cases, as with those examined in the paragraph above on use of the present tense, the troublesome auxiliary is better replaced by 'is to' or, in the second example, by replacing 'shall be' with 'is'.</p>

<p><strong>Explaining provisions</strong><br>
Recourse has also sometimes been made to 'shall' for an explanatory purpose:</p>

<p>An interim order shall not be deemed to be an adoption order within the meaning of this Act.</p>
<p>The Board shall be lawfully constituted if there are no less than 7 elected members present.</p>

<p>In fact 'be deemed to be' in the first example is a slightly archaic form hardly ever used even in formal language outside legislation (in modern writing, the equivalent would be 'be treated as', 'be regarded as' or 'be taken to be'), and so applying the conventions already discussed, one would write:</p>

<p>An interim order is not to be regarded as an adoption order within the meaning of this Act.</p>

<p>although, applying principles of <strong>conciseness</strong>, use in this context of the words 'deemed to be' is arguably redundant, and the better draft would be:</p>

<p>An interim order is not an adoption order within the meaning of this Act.</p>

<p>In the second example, all that is needed is '...is lawfully constituted if...'</p>

<h3>5.3.2 Potential problems with 'may'</h3>

<p><strong>The use of 'can'</strong><br>
As has been seen, from the variety of words and expressions that could be used to indicate discretion, 'may' is the one usually chosen. Of course in informal spoken language another verb auxiliary 'can' is often used in the same sense:</p>

<p>You can call me by my first name or my nickname.<br>
He can do whatever he thinks is right in the circumstances.</p>

<p>In formal English, however, it is not correct to do this. 'Can' in its correct use is synonymous with 'is able to' and should be reserved for referring to physical or mental ability to do something, rather than having permission to do it. What is needed is a word indicating permission or discretion. Legislative equivalents of the above examples might be:</p>

<p>An Act may be referred to by its short title or chapter number.<br>
The Authority may direct a course of action that it considers appropriate in the circumstances.</p>

<p><strong>The use of 'may not'</strong><br>
At first sight the negative form 'may not' seems to have the same meaning as the negative obligation form 'must not', and indeed in spoken language any of the following might be stated interchangeably:</p>

<p>You must not smoke in here.<br>
You may not smoke in here.</p>

<p>or even:</p>

<p>You cannot smoke in here.</p>

<p>The third version has already been considered, but there is also a fine but important distinction between the first two. In legislative rules, 'must not' is used to create <strong>an obligation not to do something</strong>; 'may not', on the other hand, is reserved for cases in which it is required to emphasise <strong>a lack of authority to do something</strong> (without necessarily incurring a penalty for contravention):</p>

<p>A licensee may not apply to renew a licence more than 30 days before it is due to expire.</p>
<p>A court may not convict a person of an offence under this section if that person has paid the relevant fixed penalty.</p>

<p>In these cases, the sense is not so much to forbid a person from doing something as to indicate or explain the lack of a right or discretion. A licensee who failed to comply would presumably simply be told to reapply at the correct time and, in the unlikely event that a person were actually to be convicted of the specified offence in the circumstances mentioned, he or she would have an unanswerable appeal.</p>

<p>Contrast, however, the more usual type of case:</p>

<p>A person must not carry on the business of a hawker unless he or she holds a hawker's licence of the appropriate class.</p>

<p>This clearly creates an important negative obligation, and there would undoubtedly have to be a provision following it making anybody who failed to comply liable to penal sanctions.</p>

<p><strong>Other meanings of 'may'</strong><br>
Finally, there is sometimes inconsistent use of 'may' in the sense of 'is' (or 'are') and 'might':</p>

<p>In sections 3 to 9 of this Act a reference to adoption is to adoption of an infant wherever the infant may be habitually resident.</p>

<p>Although there would not in practice be any difficulty in understanding this provision, it would be better from the point of view of consistency to use 'is' instead of 'may be'.</p>

<p>Furthermore, an ambiguity could possibly arise with inconsistent use, particularly if the auxiliary is capable of meaning 'might':</p>

<p>The Minister may not make an order if the circumstances set out in subsection (3) apply.</p>
<p>The application of this Act may be subject to such modifications as are prescribed.</p>

<p>The first could be construed either as a lack of power in the specified circumstances or (if 'may' is understood in the sense of 'might') as an explanation of the way in which that power could be expected to be exercised in a particular case. In addition, the question arises with regard to the second example as to whether the sentence confers a power to make modifications or (as in the first example) is an explanation of what might happen. Although legislation is construed as creating rules rather than giving explanations, it would nevertheless be better to redraft the above provisions:</p>

<p>The Minister [is not to] [must not] make an order if the circumstances set out in subsection (3) apply.</p>
<p>The application of this Act is subject to such modifications as are prescribed.</p></body></html>