<h1>Acknowledgements</h1>

<p>An immense amount of work by various people and institutions, to whom the Commonwealth Secretariat is most grateful, has gone into the development of this publication. The Secretariat is greatly indebted to the Hon. Justice V.C.R.A. Crabbe who, as has already been indicated, was given the task of producing the original draft <em>Commonwealth Legislative Drafting Manual</em>.</p>

<p>The Secretariat’s deep gratitude goes to Roger Rose, former First Parliamentary Counsel, Kenya, and Director of Studies for the RIPA Legislative Drafting Courses, London, and consultant, who worked tirelessly and selflessly to produce this publication. The Secretariat is most grateful to the CALC Working Group whose invaluable and insightful comments helped to enrich the publication. The Working Group comprised Peter Quiggin, the erstwhile President of CALC, and various CALC members: Theresa Johnson (Hong Kong), Adrian Hogarth (UK), and Brenda King of Northern Ireland who has just been elected as the new President of CALC.</p>

<p>The Secretariat is equally indebted to the following Governments of some of our member countries who also commented on the draft publication: Australia (through CALC), Botswana, Cameroon, Lesotho, Mauritius, Montserrat, The United Kingdom (also through CALC), and Zambia.</p>

<p>The support and apt contributions of Katalaina Sapolu, Director of the Rule of Law Division of the Secretariat, Steven Malby, Head of the Law and Development Section and Elizabeth Bakibinga-Gaswaga, Legal Adviser, Rule of Law Division, were invaluable in finalising this work, as were those of Segametsi Mothibatsela, Legal Adviser, Rule of Law Division, who worked closely with Roger Rose and managed the project. It would be remiss of the Secretariat to overlook the professional and timely advice of its publications and design team, particularly Alison Arnold, Manager, Design and Production, Hugh Gulland, Design and Production Officer, Sherry Dixon, Publications Manager, and Christina Woollatt, Publications Assistant.</p>

<p>The Secretariat apologises to anyone whom it has inadvertently omitted to mention, and wishes to convey its sincere gratitude for their invaluable contribution.</p>